Present proof v2 (#486)
hyperledger/aries-rfcs: features/0454-present-proof-v2/README.md

- Status: [PROPOSED](/README.md#proposed)
- Since: 2020-05-27
- Status Note:  See [RFC 0453](../0453-issue-credential-v2/README.md) for the corresponding issue credential protocol.
- Supersedes: [RFC 0037](../0037-present-proof/README.md)
- Start Date: 2020-05-27
- Tags: [feature](/tags.md#feature), [protocol](/tags.md#protocol), [credentials](/tags.md#credentials), [test-anomaly](/tags.md#test-anomaly)

## Version Change Log

### 2.0 - Alignment with [RFC 0434 Issue Credential](../0453-issue-credential-v2/README.md)

- The "formats" field is added to all the messages to link the specific attachment IDs with the verifiable presentation format and version of the attachment.
- The details that are part of each message type about the different attachment formats serves as a registry of the known formats and versions.
- Version 2.0 uses &lt;angle brackets&gt; explicitly to mark all values that may vary between instances, such as identifiers and comments.

## Summary

A protocol supporting a general purpose verifiable presentation exchange regardless of the specifics of the underlying verifiable presentation request and verifiable presentation format.

## Motivation

> We need a standard protocol for a verifier to request a presentation from a prover, and for the prover to respond by presenting a proof to the verifier. We doing that exchange, we want to provide a mechanism for the participants to negotiate the underlying format and content of the proof.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We need a standard protocol for a verifier to request a presentation from a prover, and for the prover to respond by presenting a proof to the verifier. When doing that exchange, we want to provide a mechanism for the participants to negotiate the underlying format and content of the proof.
```

Diagrams in this protocol were made in draw.io. To make changes:

- upload the drawing HTML from this folder to the [draw.io](https://draw.io) site (Import From...GitHub),
- make changes,
- export the picture and HTML to your local copy of this repo, and
- submit a pull request.

### Roles

The roles are `verifier` and `prover`.  The `verifier` requests the presentation of a proof and verifies the presentation, while the `prover` prepares the proof and presents it to the verifier. Optionally, although unlikely from a business sense, the `prover` may initiate an instance of the protocol using the `propose-presentation` message.

### States

#### States for Verifier

* request-sent
* proposal-received
* presentation-received
* abandoned
* done

#### States for Prover

* request-received
* proposal-sent
* presentation-sent
* abandoned
* done

For the most part, these states map onto the transitions shown in the choreography diagram in obvious ways. However, a few subtleties are worth highlighting:

> * The final transitions for the verifier (Send Presentation Reject, Send Presentation Ack, and Receive Presentation Reject) all result in a final `done` state, but this `done` may or may not be the verifiers intended outcome. We may want to tweak this in a future version of the protocol.

Reviewer: > Send Presentation Reject, Send Presentation Ack, and Receive Presentation Reject

What is the difference between "send presentation reject" and "receive presentation reject"? The mismatch of terms between the diagram and this sentence is confusing and makes it hard to compare the two.

Does "send presentation reject" refer to the verifier's transition "send request-presentation" -> "receive problem-report"?

Does "receive presentation reject" refer to a transition not illustrated in the diagram where the presentation is received and yet is not valid?

Author: I didn't play with that section in V2 and will have another look.

Author: As I interpret this, the "send presentation reject" is sent by the verifier and "receive presentation reject" is received by the verifier.  I'll reword to make that clear and that those send the state to "abandoned", not "done" as a terminal state.

Ah...I see.  You are thinking of "receive presentation reject" as another "receive presentation AND reject"?  Which I think is "send presentation reject".  Sigh... :-)

Reviewer: @swcurran I think this section (including the choreography diagram) needs cleanup. State transitions are critical for a protocol RFC, and there seem to be a few missing here as we've discussed above.

The existing diagram might get too cluttered if you add them. Consider perhaps switching to a state matrix.

> To Do: Should the previous sentence be addressed? Removed?

* A similar situation exists with the final transitions for the Prover and its final transitions (Send Presentation Reject, Receive Presentation Ack, and Receive Presentation Reject).
* When a Prover makes a (counter-)proposal, it transitions to the `proposal-sent` state. This state is only present by implication in the choreography diagram; it essentially equates to the null or begin state in that the Prover does nothing until a presentation request arrives, triggering the leftmost transition for the Prover.

> Errors might occur in various places. For example, a Verifier might time out waiting for the Prover to supply a presentation. Errors trigger a `problem-report`. In this version of the protocol, all errors cause the state of both parties (the sender and the receiver of the `problem-report`) to revert to `null` (meaning it is no longer engaged in the protocol at all). Future versions of the protocol may allow more granular choices.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Errors might occur in various places. For example, a Verifier might time out waiting for the Prover to supply a presentation. Errors trigger a `problem-report`. In this version of the protocol, all errors cause the state of both parties (the sender and the receiver of the `problem-report`) transition to `abandoned` (meaning it is no longer engaged in the protocol at all). Future versions of the protocol may allow more granular choices.
```

Author: Will make the change.  Can we drop the last sentence since that is true of every word and phrase in the RFC?

Author: Fixed in next commit - removed the final sentence and the related "To Do".

Reviewer: > Can we drop the last sentence since that is true of every word and phrase in the RFC?

If you're referring to this then sure:

> Future versions of the protocol may allow more granular choices.

> To Do: Should the previous sentence be addressed in this version? Should it be removed?

### Choreography Diagram

> ![present proof](credential-presentation.png)

Reviewer: The verifier's "Verify `presentation`" activity should be substituted for a decision point, eg. "Is `presentation` valid?" with Yes or No as outcomes.

Reviewer: Is "Receive Presentation Reject" [here](https://github.com/hyperledger/aries-rfcs/pull/486/files#diff-6f5d41c9a81691c26389a4e0172b90a1R68) the "No" outcome for my suggestion above ?

Reviewer: I think this may have been left as a TODO [here](https://github.com/hyperledger/aries-rfcs/pull/486#issuecomment-649129451)? @swcurran correct me if I'm wrong

Author: Based on the last Aries WG call (20200624) call, I think we want to add a paragraph on "Verify" (cryptographic) and an optional "Validate" (business rules) and suggest that the outcome from the Verifier be the outcome of the validation.

I think that is what you are saying as well in this comment, right @llorllale ?

I will put that into the RFC, and perhaps update the picture if I can figure out how.  Yes, I know, there are directions :-).

Reviewer: > Based on the last Aries WG call (20200624) call, I think we want to add a paragraph on "Verify" (cryptographic) and an optional "Validate" (business rules) and suggest that the outcome from the Verifier be the outcome of the validation.

OK, but I'm not sure of making that distinction in the RFC...

> To Do: Should the Ack or Problem Report be **required** to transition the state to "done"? This is not done in v1.0, and not done in the connection-less presentation use of the v1.0 protocol.

## Messages

The present proof protocol consists of these messages:

* `propose-presentation` - Prover to Verifier (optional) - propose a presentation or send a counter-proposal in response to a `request-presentation` message
* `request-presentation` - Verifier to Prover - request a presentation
* `presentation` - Prover to Verifier - provide a presentation in response to a request

In addition, the [`ack`](../0015-acks/README.md) and [`problem-report`](../0035-report-problem/README.md) messages are adopted into the protocol for confirmation and error handling.

> The messages that include `~attach` attachments may use either form of the embedded attachment&mdash;`base64` or `json`. In the examples below, one or the other is arbitrarily used.

Reviewer: What's the reason for this restriction? Why is `links` excluded?

Reviewer 2: I think this was just a missing detail, and that `links` would still be valid, too. But let's see what others say.

Author: I had not thought the links style would be used because of the contents of some of the messages. Anything that is hash/linked is easily shared (accidentally or on purpose) by the message receiver. That is the same for embedded data, it's just (feels) easier with a URL. Not a strong argument :-).

Note that the attachment could be embedded using JSON which in turn contains a hashlink (or hash and link). 

I'm ok with adding it if others are good with it (and OK with leaving it out).

If added here, it should also be added to the v2.0 Issue Credential, right?

Reviewer: I think it should be included.

> If added here, it should also be added to the v2.0 Issue Credential, right?

Yes, for consistency.

Reviewer 2: Yes, the two should be consistent. But we shouldn't be adding something to allow this; we should be subtracting something -- specifically, the verbiage that says we only support a subset of the attachment capability. Let's just say that we use attachments -- and if clarification is needed, we can add "in all their forms."

Reviewer: > Yes, the two should be consistent. But we shouldn't be adding something to allow this; we should be subtracting something -- specifically, the verbiage that says we only support a subset of the attachment capability. Let's just say that we use attachments -- and if clarification is needed, we can add "in all their forms."

Agreed.

The `~attach` array is to be used to enable a single presentation to be requested/delivered in different verifiable presentation formats. The ability to have multiple attachments must not be used to request/deliver multiple different presentations in a single instance of the protocol.

### Propose Presentation

An optional message sent by the prover to the verifier to initiate a proof presentation process, or in response to a `request-presentation` message when the prover wants to propose using a different presentation format or request. Schema:

```json
{

>     "@type": "did:sov:BzCbsNYhMrjHiqZDTUASHg;spec/present-proof/%VER/propose-presentation",

Reviewer: wrong `@type`

Author: Fixed in next commit.

#### Negotiation and Preview

Negotiation prior to the delivery of the presentation can be done using the `propose-presentation` and `request-presentation` messages. The common negotiation use cases would be about the claims to go into the presentation and the format of the verifiable presentation.

#### Propose Attachment Registry

##### Hyperledger Indy Proposal Attachment

For Hyperledger Indy the following `format` values may be used:

- `hlindy-zkp-v1.0` -- The Indy ZKP Verifiable Credentials Model v1.0.

The Hyperledger Indy v1.0 proposal attachment contains an Indy presentation request. The structure is the same as used in the Indy attachment to the `request-presentation` message. The structure comes directly from libindy and is base64-encoded. For more information see the [Libindy API](https://github.com/hyperledger/indy-sdk/blob/57dcdae74164d1c7aa06f2cccecaae121cefac25/libindy/src/api/anoncreds.rs#L1214).

### Request Presentation

From a verifier to a prover, the `request-presentation` message describes values that need to be revealed and predicates that need to be fulfilled. Schema:

```json
{

>     "@type": "did:sov:BzCbsNYhMrjHiqZDTUASHg;spec/present-proof/%VER/request-presentation",

Reviewer: wrong `@type`

Author: Fixed in next commit

* `formats` -- contains an entry for each `request_presentations~attach` array entry, providing the the value of the attachment `@id` and the verifiable presentation request format and version of the attachment. Accepted values for the `format` items are provided in the per format [Attachment](#presentation-request-attachment-registry) registry immediately below.
* `request_presentations~attach` -- an array of attachments containing the acceptable verifiable presentation requests.

#### Presentation Request Attachment Registry

##### Hyperledger Indy Presentation Request Attachment

For Hyperledger Indy, the following `format` values may be used:

- `hlindy-zkp-v1.0` -- The Indy ZKP Verifiable Credentials Model v1.0.

The Hyperledger Indy v1.0 presentation request attachment contains data from libindy about the presentation request, base64-encoded, as returned from `libindy`. For more information see the [Libindy API](https://github.com/hyperledger/indy-sdk/blob/57dcdae74164d1c7aa06f2cccecaae121cefac25/libindy/src/api/anoncreds.rs#L1214).

### Presentation

This message is a response to a Presentation Request message and contains signed presentations. Schema:

```json
{

>     "@type": "did:sov:BzCbsNYhMrjHiqZDTUASHg;spec/present-proof/%VER/presentation",

Reviewer: wrong `@type`

Author: Fixed in next commit

In addition, the [`ack`](../0015-acks/README.md) and [`problem-report`](../0035-report-problem/README.md) messages are adopted into the protocol for confirmation and error handling.

The messages that include `~attach` attachments may use either form of the embedded attachment&mdash;`base64` or `json`. In the examples below, one or the other is arbitrarily used.

The `~attach` array is to be used to enable a single presentation to be requested/delivered in different verifiable presentation formats. The ability to have multiple attachments must not be used to request/deliver multiple different presentations in a single instance of the protocol.

### Propose Presentation

An optional message sent by the prover to the verifier to initiate a proof presentation process, or in response to a `request-presentation` message when the prover wants to propose using a different presentation format or request. Schema:

```json
{
    "@type": "did:sov:BzCbsNYhMrjHiqZDTUASHg;spec/present-proof/%VER/propose-presentation",
    "@id": "<uuid-propose-presentation>",
    "comment": "some comment",
    "formats" : [
        {
            "attach_id" : "<attach@id value>",

>             "format" : "<format-and-version>",

Reviewer: @swcurran the purpose of `format` seems to be to communicate the exact schema of the attachment's contents. This is useful in other protocols as well, so why not add a new field to the attachments RFC?

Reviewer 2: That's an interesting idea that I had not considered.

My mental model for attachments was heavily influenced by email attachments. There, the only typing you need is a MIME type. However, I knew we needed some extra precision in DIDComm, so I added the ability to connect a specific attachment to a specific field in a DIDComm message (e.g., in an insurance claim, you might want to say, "pictures of wind damage on the roof of my shed are in attachment #3" in a machine-readable way). So we have that.

What you're proposing here is attachments getting an additional "format" property that isn't a type, exactly; rather, it's a fine-grained distinction that splits one MIME type into many similar sub-formats. We probably didn't think of this before because we assumed only VC attachments--not photos or office docs or medical data--needed the extra level of detail. If we can satisfy ourselves that it's generally useful, then I guess I'm not opposed to updating the properties of attachments.

I'd be curious to hear Stephen's opinion.

Reviewer: @dhh1128 even within VCs we have multiple schemas.

It's not enough to parse a VC generically and validate its proof. Oftentimes we need to parse it and extract data from it, and this is typically from custom, well-defined schemas.

And you're right, attachments can contain anything.

The second point is that this same structure is duplicated in issue-credential V2. So it seems extra-obvious to put this in the attachments RFC.

Reviewer 2: The argument about VC schema doesn't feel convincing to me yet, but maybe say more about it in case I'm missing something? Of course we have different schemas for different VCs -- but we have a mechanism for communicating the schema (@context and/or the credential def from Indy); we don't need to declare it somewhere else. And besides, the value we would put into "format" isn't the schema of the cred anyway; it's something about whether the cred is JSON-LD-centric, JWT-centric, etc -- is it not? 

What would convince me for sure is what I said before: "if we can satisfy ourselves that [the mechanism is] generally useful." And we'd have to carefully explain what we intend by "format" and how it is different from MIME type.

Reviewer: @dhh1128 sure - the VC example was poor.

Consider just a JSON object you're trying to get across. MimeType="application/json", format=??

Consider a string representation of something you're sending (eg. a DID (not a did doc)?). MimeType="text/plain", format=??

Reviewer: I realized I'm mixing thoughts about how to express the purpose of an attachment vs its format for my use case. I've opened #505 to continue discussion on the purpose of attachments.

I still suspect there's value in this format idea.

> the value we would put into "format" isn't the schema of the cred anyway; it's something about whether the cred is JSON-LD-centric, JWT-centric, etc -- is it not?

It's the schema. From this PR:

> The Hyperledger Indy v1.0 propose filter attachment schema is as follows:

Reviewer: To be clear: while I think this format idea probably has merits, this suggestion I've raised is in no way a blocker of this proposal as far as I am concerned.

        }
    ],
    "proposal~attach": [
        {
            "@id": "<attachment identifier>",
            "mime-type": "application/json",
            "data": {
                "json": "<bytes for json>"
            }
        }
    ]
}
```

Description of fields:

* `comment` -- a field that provides some human readable information about the proposed presentation.

> * `formats` -- contains an entry for each `filter~attach` array entry, including an optional value of the attachment `@id` (if attachments are present) and the verifiable presentation format and version of the attachment. Accepted values for the `format` items are provided in the per format "Attachment" sections immediately below.

Reviewer 3: Please replace `filter~attach` with `proposal~attach`.

I see that the previous version has [presentation-preview](https://github.com/hyperledger/aries-rfcs/tree/master/features/0037-present-proof#presentation-preview) message.
Also, I noted that issue-credential-v2 has [preview-credential](https://github.com/hyperledger/aries-rfcs/tree/master/features/0453-issue-credential-v2#preview-credential) message.

Since those protocols are similar I assume that we missed something. I see two possible options:
1. We need to remove a preview-credential message from the issue-credential-v2.
2. We need to add a presentation-preview to the present-proof-v2.

Because we have attachments and formats It looks like the `1` option is what we need.
Please confirm whether I am right.

Reviewer: @swcurran there does seem to be an inconsistency. Is this intentional?

Author: Fixed the `filter~attach` issue.  The "presentation preview" content was initially moved over to the v2 protocol under a different name.  Per @tmarkovski suggestion below, we discussed switching from this "presentation preview" format to just using an Indy "presentation-request" data structure (same as for the request-presentation message.  This was discussed on the Aries WG call on 2020.06.24 and all agreed that's what we should do.  So, "presentation preview" is now gone in both name and content, replaced in the proposal message with the presentation request.

I think that resolves this question.  Note that we definitely don't want to remove the preview credential from the issue-credential propose message.

Reviewer: @swcurran "`filter~attach`" is still there, ie. the line pointed out by @soluchok has not been fixed.

#### Negotiation and Preview

Negotiation prior to the delivery of the presentation can be done using the `propose-presentation` and `request-presentation` messages. The common negotiation use cases would be about the claims to go into the presentation and the format of the verifiable presentation.

#### Propose Attachment Registry

##### Hyperledger Indy Proposal Attachment

For Hyperledger Indy the following `format` values may be used:

- `hlindy-zkp-v1.0` -- The Indy ZKP Verifiable Credentials Model v1.0.

The Hyperledger Indy v1.0 propose filter attachment schema is as follows:

```jsonc
{
    "@id": "1234-1234-1325-5423",
    "attributes": [
        {
            "name": "<attribute_name>",
            "cred_def_id": "<cred_def_id>",
            "mime-type": "<type>",
            "value": "<value>",
            "referent": "<referent>"
        },
        // more attributes
    ],
    "predicates": [
        {
            "name": "<attribute_name>",
            "cred_def_id": "<cred_def_id>",
            "predicate": "<predicate>",
            "threshold": <threshold>
        },
        // more predicates
    ]
}
```

> > To Do: Is this structure sufficient to achieve the desired level of negotiation?

Reviewer 4: Starting a discussion here as we have just implemented v1 of this protocol. This message format seems to be a configuration for how the verifier should construct the proof request. Why not simply allow the proposer to submit an actual proof request format instead (with updated nonce)? It would clearly communicate the proposed intent, and add flexibility for fill restriction set per the WQL format, and non-revocation. Non-revocation is important, as the holder can propose a time they know they have a valid credential for.
I'm curious if this has been discussed before and what the pros and cons of using the same structure.

Author: This was discussed on the Aries WG call on 2020.06.24 and all agreed that's what we should do. So, "presentation preview" is now gone in both name and content, replaced in the proposal message with the presentation request.

* `formats` -- contains an entry for each `filter~attach` array entry, including an optional value of the attachment `@id` (if attachments are present) and the verifiable presentation format and version of the attachment. Accepted values for the `format` items are provided in the per format "Attachment" sections immediately below.
* `proposal~attach` -- an optional array of attachments that further define the presentation request being proposed. This might be used to clarify which formats or format versions are wanted.

If the `proposal~attach` is not provided, the `attach_id` item in the `formats` array should not be provided. That form of the `propose-presentation` message is to indicate the presentation formats supported by the prover, independent of the verifiable presentation request content.

#### Negotiation and Preview

Negotiation prior to the delivery of the presentation can be done using the `propose-presentation` and `request-presentation` messages. The common negotiation use cases would be about the claims to go into the presentation and the format of the verifiable presentation.

#### Propose Attachment Registry

> ##### Hyperledger Indy Proposal Attachment

Reviewer 2: V1 of this protocol has been criticized as being Indy-centric. We know that was not the intent, but that's the way it reads to a non-Indy audience. It would be nice to include some a section for something besides Indy. If we can't add such a section because we don't know what it would contain, can we create a placeholder with "TODO" text? And can we put it before Indy?

Author: This will be added shortly (follow on PR) to include the DIF presentation definition.  Leaving off for now.

The verifiable presentation standardization work being conducted in parallel to this in DIF and the W3C Credentials Community Group (CCG) should be included in at least the `Registry` sections of this document, and ideally used to eliminate the need for presentation format-specific options.

## Rationale and alternatives

## Prior art

The existing [RFC 0036 Present Proof](../0037-present-proof/README.md) protocol and implementations.

## Unresolved questions

- There might need to be a way to associate a payment with the present proof protocol.
- A number of `To Do` items are embedded in the content of the RFC.

## Implementations

The following lists the implementations (if any) of this RFC. Please do a pull request to add your implementation. If the implementation is open source, include a link to the repo or to the implementation within the repo. Please be consistent in the "Name" field so that a mechanical processing of the RFCs can generate a list of all RFCs supported by an Aries implementation.

Name / Link | Implementation Notes
--- | ---

>  |  |

Reviewer 2: This should have 1 vertical bar, not 2.

Author: Fixed

```json
{

>     "@type": "http://didcomm.org/present-proof/%VER/propose-presentation",

Reviewer: nit: it's "https"
